all right hello everyone i'm going to
talk today about searching for solar
siblings looking for
the the sun's sister stars that were
born in the same cluster as the sun
and we've got an illustration on the
title screen here of a few of the
sun-like stars and the nearest stars to
the sun and a few of the planets there
to scale
so sol that's the sun here
some of these other stars are a little
bit smaller than the sun in the case of
alpha century b a little bit larger in
the case of alpha centauri a and we're
going to take a look at
how we can work out if any of these
stars are
the
sister stars of the sun or if they just
happen to be nearby
and consider what we can find out
so
most stars are born in star clusters
they
are produced
out of a nebula and it tends to produce
a range of sizes and uh colors of stars
there's a star cluster shown here with a
number of hot bright blue stars and then
if you look in the background you'll see
there's some slightly fainter white
stars that are the next level down in
terms of mass and power output
um and then
you go fainter down to the
yellow and orange and even down to the
little red dwarf stars which are very
very hard to see indeed in the
photograph
so that's the typical sort of mixture of
stars you'll get a lot of small ones and
a few large ones because it's easier to
make
enough mass gather together to make a
small star than it is to pack it
together to make a real monster
um
and
this is a sort of
what we are we're contending with the
the uh
sons sisters could be any of these
um and
could have come from a cluster uh out
there in the galaxy somewhere
so what should we look for should we
look for stars that are still nearby the
sun
or stars that have a similar orbit to
the sun around the galaxy
perhaps we should look for ones that are
similar composition in terms of the
mixture of elements
um maybe we should look for similar
types of stars
or in particular similar ages that would
be good because if they were born
together they'd all have the same age
well the first thing is we could look at
nearby ones
this is sensible because nearby ones are
much easier to study and we'd be able to
learn more about them more easily
and the way we determine if something is
nearby
is really first of all we look to see if
the position against the
apparently unmoving very distant stars
is changing the so-called proper motion
as the star zips across our line of
sight compared to the background the
position will appear to change and
that's a clue immediately then it's a
nearby star
and that process is illustrated in the
diagram on the left
and on the right we have the method we
use for measuring the distance to nearby
stars which is to look to see how the
apparent position
changes over the course of six months as
the earth moves around the sun changing
the line of sight to the nearby stars
versus the very distant ones that don't
appear to move at all
and we can measure the angle and do a
little bit of trigonometry and work out
the
distance away that the star must be
now
in terms of looking for stars that are
nearby or
um that as regards them being
sisters of the sun
the problem is that
we are orbiting around the milky way
galaxy
at a distance of 27 000 light years from
the center
and so it takes 230 million years to do
a complete lap of the galaxy
but whilst that sounds like a very long
time
the sun was born 4
500 million years ago and has completed
16 full orbits since it was born
and this is rather means that any
companions if they had us just a
slightly different velocity or were
moving in a slightly different direction
they would have become separated from us
as the uh
giant
stirring has occurred it's very much
like uh stirring a cup of tea put the
spoon in and whisk it around 16 times
then the milk will be thoroughly mixed
up and distributed uh into the cup um
and that's what has happened really
the uh
sons sisters they must be out there but
they're stirred very effectively into
the
rest of the stars of the galaxy by the
fact that we've been around so many
times
were we looking for much uh younger
associations of stars if the sun was
much younger uh then it might be
possible and there's a good example of
this called the ursa major
co-moving group ursa major or the plough
or the big dipper shown in the
photograph there
a color is actually a collection of
nearby stars most of the bright stars
there
um are part of
a group that were formed together
just 300 million years ago so they've
only done one lap of the galaxy um and
haven't been completely scattered and
stirred
yet and there's probably 14
main stars and maybe as many as 50 total
that um
make up this group
that all seem to be going in the same
direction at the same speed hence the
name co-moving group
and they they're scattered over a region
about 30 light years across
about 80 light years away from us
and that all points back to them having
an origin in a small cluster something
like 300 million years ago and gradually
they're spreading out and
uh giving it long enough you won't be
able to tell
that they were once all together because
they will have been stirred into the
galaxy as has the case with the sun
because it's 15 times older
now another thing you could use as an
indicator this is a very good indicator
of the age of a star in in many ways
is to look to see
what chemical composition it has
the slide here is entitled metals
because astronomers refer to all
elements heavier than helium as metals
this i think greatly annoys chemists
because
there are
many non-metals that are actually
heavier than helium
things like carbon and oxygen for
example not even rare
but nevertheless that's the term that is
sometimes used for the heavier elements
from element 3 lithium onwards
but the point is that the chemical
composition of a star if you can measure
it
gives you a clue as to its evolutionary
history and in particular how long ago
it formed
and the reason for that is that the
interstellar medium of gas and dust
which collapses eventually to form stars
began life
as 75 hydrogen and 17 then 24 helium
with just a trace of the heavier
elements an unknown trace as well
but as time goes on massive stars form
evolve
and die as supernovae and scatter their
contents all across the
cosmos
polluting the
material with
the heavy elements that they've
manufactured
and so gradually
the composition of the universe getting
dirtier and dirtier with more and more
metals present
now
what this
shows here on the graph is that
you can measure
the
vertical axis as the composition of
stars
in terms of the ratio of heavy elements
to light elements
and then look at the age and the young
stars intermediate stars and old stars
are clearly separable into these three
groups here
that we've colored blue green and red i
mean you could have put the dividing
line anywhere you liked but the point is
that the
composition gradually gets uh
increasingly
uh altered as the time goes on and this
is because
younger stars have been formed out of
more polluted
interstellar medium where there's been
more time for the interstellar medium to
accumulate more and more of the metals
so
if we look at the composition of the sun
we can
[Music]
use that and try and find
stars that have the same composition
because that indicates they were
potentially formed at the same time or
out of the same cloud of material
even
now you might look at this graph and say
oh look there's quite a big scatter for
the
older stars
this is because in fact
when you look at the older stars in red
and also true for the green grouping the
green grouping got two peaks in it
um dropping down and the red has got
several rows in it
this is because the milky way consists
of the merger of several smaller
galaxies
and the
oldest stars may well have come from
those original galaxies and been on
slightly different evolutionary tracks
and so we get different subpopulations
that we have to worry about
now what about looking at
stars and considering the type of star
and whether we should worry about
whether it's a sibling of the sun or not
well
this chart shows
different classes of stars from red
dwarfs at the bottom orange dwarfs
yellow dwarfs like the sun yellowy white
stars white stars bluey white stars and
then the bluest of the blue at the top
there
and
the horizontal axis is showing the
lifetime with each column each step
being 10 times the life of the previous
column
so the biggest
super giant blue stars they they blow up
very rapidly as a supernova
and in just a million years
the next class down last ten times as
long so they'll last 10
million years
for the white stars it's more like a
hundred million years and then they blow
up the bluey white ones it's perhaps one
billion years
and then they're gone and they they die
less spectacular deaths as uh
planetary nebulae rather than supernovae
but nevertheless scatter their material
into the cosmos
stars like the sun 10 times again so 10
billion years and then again planetary
nebulae and scattering the material
and so on for orange stars 10 times
longer again and red stars 10 times
longer even than that but these ages
have never been achieved because the
universe is only 13 billion years old so
no orange or red star has yet been born
and come to the end of its life because
they live so long
that there just hasn't been time for
that to happen yet
now the point of this is that
the largest stars
burn bright and die young
and so there's no point in considering
them to be
siblings of the sun because any big
bright
blue or white star just simply cannot be
old enough
um it would never have
been
possible for it to have been
um
in existence as long as the sun has
because they will have run out of fuel
and indeed most of the yellowy white
ones the more massive
uh
of that middle class
star those probably wouldn't they only
last a billion years and the sun's
already four and a half to five billion
years old so
um most of the yellow white stars can be
ruled out as well really the only ones
we need consider are the sun-like stars
the ones that are very slightly more
massive than that
and the lighter orange and red ones
because they're the only ones that can
have been around
since the birth of the sun
so perhaps
with all that build in mind we should
have a look at the nearby
sun-like stars
sunlight stars because
anything brighter is uh going to be too
young
and
nearby because
they're the easiest ones to study
so let's start in our backyard with
alpha centauri
alpha centauri is a triple star system
the two components are called
rigel cantaurus or alpha century a
taliban alpha centauri b and proxima
centauri because it's the nearest star
to the sun
and
a or rigel canturus is a little bit
bigger than our sun tollyman a little
bit smaller and an orange
colored star
but very very similar in lifetimes and
so on
now at the moment these two orbit each
other quite closely and we have yet to
discover any planets that orbit around
either
alpha centauri a or b
but we have found that there are two and
probably three planets orbiting proxima
centauri
and it wouldn't surprise me if we
eventually discover that there are
planets around the other two as well
another nearby star is tau ceti
again in the illustration here we have
the sun on the left
and tau seti
for comparison
on the right
a little bit smaller than the sun
a little bit cooler so 80 percent the
mass 428 degrees
cooler
um
5344 kelvin and that reduction in
temperature and reduction in size is
enough to actually reduce its overall
power output to half that of the sun
but it's got a confirmed family of
planets and two of them are potentially
in the habitable zone so
very very interesting indeed
and it's 25 older than the sun so
uh any evolutionary processes going on
there will have had more time to do
interesting things
also in our backyard
cosmically speaking
is epsilon aradani
this is again a little bit smaller than
the sun smaller even than taosetti
and
has a temperature just over 5000 degrees
so it's an orange star a k type star not
a g type star but a very late k
and
this one's very young we can age it
looking at the behavior of the chemicals
in its outer layers
and we figure it's less than a billion
years old
now it probably has a jupiter-sized
planet and perhaps even more other
smaller planets
still looking into that and it's going
to be a prime target for the james webb
space telescope to have a look at
also uh
going a little bit further away from the
sun but looking at sun-like stars we
find
another g-type very similar to the sun
just 103 of the mass
101 of the radius 104 of the power
output so i think you'd agree that's
very sun-like indeed
is 18 scorpi
and the distance and brightness are
shown at the top of the screen there
now
if we try to work out what's going on
we can
look at uh how these things behave
what happens to the temperature
of them and so forth and
it's uh
showing us that um this is still quite a
young star so 2.9 billion years old
not yet settled down into its most
stable phase
so it's not quite onto the main sequence
yet but again quite a good candidate for
a sunlight star
there is a sort of timeline of stars
like the sun um we're here 4.6
billion years since
four week out of the nebula
18 scorpio much younger 2.9 near the
beginning of its life
and so still increasing in brightness as
well
interestingly they failed to detect any
sort of dust disk around it looking for
an infrared heat signature of a dust
disk but they have discovered a planet
that orbits in just under seven years
going around the sun
around 18 scorpio which again makes it a
very sun-like system
one way in which it's not like the sun
that is rather curious in that it has
three times as much of element number
three lithium as we do
and
that's uh peculiar because
um
[Music]
the uh sort of characteristics of these
stars are such that uh you perhaps might
not expect this
so
we can find that lithium tends to be
destroyed if it gets dragged into this
stellar core
um and main sequence stars where fusion
of hydrogen is going on in the core
usually end up stirring enough of the
lithium to
destroy it into the core and so they
tend to be very low in in lithium
however
some sun-like stars
have
a host of uh or are the hosts of a set
of planets
and these can have
lower lithium abundances provided
abundances don't uh lead to them
being harvested in a destructive way
so using machines to rip out all the
vines for example
and then get around them would not be
allowed
now some couple of stars that have got
numbers rather than catalog names
um are of interest this one here 186302
it's uh
just a little bit less massive than the
sun
and it's been suggested this one might
in fact have been born from the same
cluster
we're not sure the temperature
profile is interesting and the orbital
parameters of it have been studied in a
paper from 2019
um
and
it
looks like it might have been thrown out
of the cluster as i said
but it's quite early for it to be being
kicked out and there's still a lot of
the hot blue stars around so we're not
quite sure about this one
perhaps more certain as a solo sibling
is this one
hd162286
this is out there in the constellation
of hercules
um 115 the mass of our sun
and but about the same size
and appears
from all our measurements
it's 4.5 billion years old so the same
as the sun
and just 103 of the metal content of the
sun so
hardly any difference at all
that makes it probably the best
candidate for
this solar sibling status
um
in orbit around it there are no hot
jupiters that's good
um but the
terrestrial planets that they have
um
may well
be in the habitable zone
um
there's one here in a mars-like orbit
which uh could potentially be habitable
so why do we care about the sun's
siblings at all is it just a sort of
academic interest to see how typical the
sun is of of the stars that it was born
with
well really
it's because of this uh hypothesis
early in the history of the solar system
solar siblings with their associated
planets would have been relatively
nearby the sun perhaps even still in the
same early star cluster
um now we know that there are a lot of
collisions that occur between planets
um during the planet forming process and
that planets occasionally get kicked out
of a solar system
and
it's therefore possible that the seeds
of life could go with them
either as part of a planet um
or a meteor or something that's been
carved off of a planet
and life is very very resilient in terms
of
the
surviving the rigors of outer space
so it's just possible that the seeds of
life or life itself might have been
shared between systems
between the planets that belong to
the sister suns
so
it would be very interesting to look at
these uh
sun-like stars
that seem to have the same age and come
from the same original cluster
and
if we find non-zero ones of those then
perhaps we could
very simply just
be looking for
life
that might have hopped from one star
system to another
so thanks very much for listening i hope
that was enjoyable do click the
subscribe button
and look at some of our other talks that
we have on here